and grabs it like this, and he falls on the floor, and Gus Hamblett, who, you know, you know Gus, anyhow, Gus just, you know, fell on his knees, he had a beer in his hand that spilled on the kid, which made it run that much more, which looked like it was, you know, really going good, and Gus was crying, you know, and the students had unplugged what they thought were all the phones,
Well, Marvin knew the house real well and knew there was a phone somewhere and went and called the police.
So, anyhow, everyone was standing around the student and the student, you know, after a couple of minutes decided, oh, this is enough, enough.
So they, and in the meantime, Jerry and two of the other faculty members had registered the gunman, had wrestled him to the ground and had his hands behind his back when the guy popped up and,
I said, joke's over, you know.
Of course, Gus was about to kill him at that point.
And then the police came.
Of course, there hadn't been any murders in College Station and they were just delighted, ooh.
And so Staisal quickly ran out and was stationed himself with his pipe against the front pillar, pretending like nothing was going on.
And the police came in and they said, where's the body?
He said, what body?
And they said, well, there's reported a murder.
And he said, no.
I think somebody must have been playing a practical joke on you.
There's no murder here.
So they went running through the house.
In the meantime, of course, windows were opening.
People were throwing out stuff and flushing commodes.
And Romnick ran out the back door, not wanting to be caught with his crew.
Then, let's see, I guess one of the wildest things that happened on campus was either my second or third year here, they always, second year, always had this cute little pumpkin carving thing for the community.
And they would invite first and second graders in to see the carved pumpkins.
So my class was going, oh, you know, why do we have to do something that rinky-dink?
And I said, well, why don't we have a haunted house?
And they said, oh, OK.
Hey, that sounds like a great idea.
So I approached Romnick, and Romnick said, OK, OK.
So essentially, they closed down Building C for a day.
And then we built this haunted house with all sorts of bizarre things in it.
There was only one thing censored.
And Stace will censor that.
One of the kids had a vet student as a roommate who had sewn together
this creature that was on ice that he was going to open up for people to view and Stacey said, no, let's not, you know.
So, but they had things like a coffin that was rigged with speaker systems.
People would get in it and then they had recorded
literally dirt being piled on until you could no longer hear the people singing, and then it went into this electronic music, and they had a guy that, the hangman, you know, that would, and he looked, they put glaze on him where he looked like he was waxed.
People would walk by and he'd grab them, and they had gallows out in the courtyard that were, you know, with a fake rope, and anyhow, it was pretty elaborate.
And about two hours into it,
You know, there were kids out on the front lawn crying, you know, mothers chasing students around with their purses, you know, because they were frightening the kids too much.
And so anyhow, it was open for another night.
So Romnick had us phone the radio station saying nobody under
you know, 10 admitted because of the scary nature.
Well, it was crowded the first night.
The second night, you couldn't even get through the building, so one of the buildings didn't collapse.
Maybe it was thick.
And Romnick never let us have another haunted house.
He got so many irate phone calls, you know, from mothers and people like that.
As you first became acquainted with Aggie students, you were nicely impressed with their capability?
Oh, yeah, work ethic.
Their work ethic?
Capabilities.
Uh-huh.
Generally, can you characterize, can you describe them in general in those early years?
Because later we want to see if they've changed, but...
Where were they from and what were their backgrounds?
They were mainly rural Texas, you know, and well, of course, Houston, Dallas, and Santa Monica, but we had a lot of Army brats and Air Force brats here.
But they were actually more open-minded than anybody because they'd lived, experienced other cultures and things like that.
Then we had the few people from New York, which were funny to have around.
Did they tend to be first-generation college students?
I would say a lot of them are first-generation college students.
If we had to classify them liberal, conservative?
Oh, always conservative.
What did they think they were going to become?
What were their professional career goals?
Most of them thought they were going to be architects, with a few exceptions, like Robert Riggs, who just used it to get a degree, and then he got into, you know, journalism.
And then Max Greiner never wanted to be an architect.
His dad was captain of the 50s football team.
And his dad sent him here because the closest thing to art was architecture.
And so Stasel and myself and a couple of the other faculty did special classes for him.
He might sign up for my fourth year design, but he was off doing art projects.
And then he went to work, you know, well he now has his own gallery and his sculptor and painter and everything else.
And then like Chris Novak that did sets for Saturday Night Live and he's done sets for several movies.
He did learn Bernstein's Requiem set and traveled through Europe with that.
But like, he wanted to be a stage designer.
So Stasel worked out a deal with the Alley Gallery and had him go down his entire senior year and co-op down there.
And then we put him in dummy classes.
And so he graduated and then got accepted into Yale for their master's program in stage design and then just skyrocketed.
And, you know, that was sort of the tenure and the mood of the environmental design.
It was like, what can we help the students achieve?
It's not like you will go through this sieve and you will come out and architect.
Stacey was happy if they were a good, happy taxi cab driver or, you know, or whatever, whatever they wanted to be, but he was essentially trying to facilitate
their future by opening as many doors as possible.
During those first years, how aware were you of the campus administration?
President, vice president of academic reform?
Well, Rudder, I'd always heard really good things about.
That he was a benevolent dictator, but he was very fair, and that most of his decisions
you know, seemed to be very good.
Did you all see him very much?
Not that much, no.
Did he come down to the architecture?
No, I would hear things from Romnick about him.
I guess they were in the poker club together.
There was a group of about seven of them.
The what club?
It was a poker club.
Oh, yes, yes.
Was it Winernie and Romnick and a bunch of them, Rudder, and they would all go play poker.
And that's where a lot of the campus business got attended to.
Let's see, Winernie was the only one that had
A little bit of a run-in with him.
Really?
Well, I mean, he came in one day and he decided that for the new health center that he was going to have me carve a wooden deal for him.
And I said, well... Now, this is in the 70s, in the 80s.
No, 70s.
70s, yeah.
And I said, well, okay, you know, I'll be glad to work with you on it.
And then the next time he met me, he said, well, I've worked out a deal where you can retain ownership.
and we'll just display it for you," which, you know, I smelled.
And I said, well, I tell you what, it's okay with me if you all own it.
And this was before I was tenured, so, you know, you sort of let go, hoping.
John Calhoun, did you see much of him?
Yeah, I would see Calhoun more than most, and I still see him around the time.
Did y'all have an impression of the central administration?
Was there ever anything that seemed to be leaning a little bit more to the technical?
Seemed like Jack Williams was maybe the first one that seemed to be a little bit more liberal arts, more like a college president.
And then after him, all the ag sort of fill-ins, you know, everyone was just like, you know.
By the time we get to the early 70s, now you came in 60 what?
Nine.
69.
All right.
We go into the early 70s.
Mr. Rudder dies.
Jack Williams becomes president in the fall of 70.
and we're looking forward to the centennial.
How did you come to do that panel over in the MSC?
Describe that, how... Well, I'm not real sure.
I think it was between you and Romnick saying that they were talking about little ceramic plates and other little, you know, paperweights and stuff.
And they said, well, there should be something that is substantial that actually commemorates it.
And I think the nice thing about it was
When I met with the committee, they said, here's six areas that we want to find, which was great.
You had freedom.
And then you went over to the archives and you found out there was no history of A&M because Detloff was still working on his book.
There was no photo essay of A&M.
And so I went through, I guess, all the annuals at least five different times, trying to go through it page by page.
I went through shoeboxes full of old mementos and things that Aggies that had died, their family had packed up the stuff and sent it back.
And then, oh, Profs Emeritus were a really good source, the ones that were still here in town.
And then the Profs in the different colleges were really good.
As to what was currently going on, the people that had the least knowledge of what was happening in their college were the deans.
Seriously.
They were clueless.
And you could go down to the next level where the profs were doing all the research, and they could tell you everything that was happening.
So that was interesting.
About how, from the time that you were first approached about doing that until you finished it, about how long was that?
Two years.
so 74 to 76 yeah and we finished it two weeks before were you given any dimensional
Not really.
And how long did it take you to decide how many panels, of what size?
Well, I knew there'd be six panels because there were six Suffolk areas.
And then, you know, researching it, you know, there could have been more than that.
But I just put it all together.
It was three months from the time I started researching until the time I ended up with cartoons that I could show the board.
Right.
And you did some, what, paper, I mean, pencil drawings?
Mm-hmm.
Pencil drawings.
At quarter scale.
Mm-hmm.
So they were just like this.
And then I had everyone look them over, and with the exception of the four X-rated words from the Corps, they were pretty much approved.
So that no one attempted to say, thou shalt not do this or this or that.
No.
Okay.
And what, they seem to be pleasantly, you know, surprised.
Were there any people that you particularly now look back and say you're grateful for their help or encouragement or anything like that?
Well, yourself and Romney.
Okay.
And you picked walnut?
Yeah.
Why walnut?
Because if you can do really small detail, it needed to be either pecan or walnut.
And walnut I like to work with because it holds the detail a little bit better.
Did you get it from any special place?
Fred Lanehart here in town.
Lanehart.
Yeah, he's a cabinetmaker that's been here forever.
He's probably, I would guess he's in his 80s.
But he went out looking, and I think he got it all from Kansas.
And he glued it up for you?
Right, it was out of one tree.
So the color would be the same.
And he glued the whole thing up and delivered it.
Was that, had you done anything of that dimension before?
Yeah, the Highland Park Methodist Church in Dallas was the same roughly size commission.
Was there anything before that?
Well, there were small welded, did welded sculptures.
I worked my way through Berkeley, selling at the Cannery in Chiardelli Square, you know, galleries there.
And May & Company, Macy's in New York, came to San Francisco and saw my stuff in a gallery there.
And they ordered 40 pieces in my last semester, which was great.
When you finished it, describe whatever kind of opening, unveiling ceremony and so forth that you remember.
Let's see, well, they had the whole thing veiled, of course, and they did a series of speeches, which was kind of a daze at the time.
And then when they dropped it, it was fun to hear, you know, just a complete silence and then, you know, the sighs and stuff.
That was really neat, hearing that.
And my parents were here at the time for that.
And you said you finished two weeks?
Ahead.
And that gave Jerry Cooper time to photograph them all from the next Texas Aggie magazine.
Were there any near cataclysms or... Well, the only...
I guess the only thing that could beat that would be Reveille had the nerve to die after we had already carved the panel she was on.
And so we had to fit in the next Reveille.
And so it isn't masked as if it belonged there.
It's a little tight.
As you look back now with a quarter century of vision, is there anything that you wish you had included or wish you hadn't included?
Not really.
I was pleased with the way I could have Aggies from the 80s to freshmen that would come and think it was done for their age.
They all found themselves in it.
And so I was real pleased with that.
And there wasn't anything, I guess the only thing that I guess puzzled me was there's only one element that keeps getting broken off.
And that was the baseball bat paddles on the core thing, which was the hazing.
And that's been broken off maybe four different times.
And they finally just decided not to replace it.
Do you think that perhaps the, that it was not totally accidental that the, those battle pads were broken off?
Oh, I'm sure it was on purpose.
Now, where did you do the carving?
In our garage.
In the garage.
Vertical or horizontal?
Horizontal.
And we had some stands built especially for them.
And then we had the garage door taken down and a glass door put there so we could get some good light in and air conditioner put in.
And during that, your work routine was what?
The same.
It was full-time teaching.
No, I know that, but did you?
Oh, okay.
Well, Sue, at that point in time, our kids were, you know, like two and four years old.
And so we hired a babysitter that would be there during the day that would occupy them while Sue was out carving.
And then I would come in at five and start carving.
And she'd start fixing dinner.
And then I would carve till midnight.
And then on weekends, both of us would carve and take turns watching the kids.
So, in fact, did she do almost half of it?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
She's, her undergraduate degree was actually in anthropology.
She was taking a dual degree in art and science, and she was at Duke for a couple years, and then she transferred back to Newman because she's from New Orleans.
And she was thinking of just going straight sculpture, and then she realized that she could use all of her credits and get an anthropology degree.
So she took some courses in anthropology and a lot of really good courses in sculpture and finished her degree there.
And then her father, who's a doctor, said, you'll not be able to manage with a sculpture background and make a living, so you have to do something else.
So she fell back on her science and went to physical therapy school at Stanford.
And so anyhow, instead of doing physical therapy,
She ended up doing the panels, and then as soon as those were over, she went into physical therapy.
And had you had any courses, any coursework in?
Yeah.
Well, both my parents were artists.
And dad was advertising artist.
My mother was more of a painter, fine arts.
And so I was raised just like that was normal everyday stuff that you painted, you did pastels, you did, I mean that was normal stuff from this high up.
And in college I had some sculpture courses that were fun.
You know, I had some interesting time with them.
And then I went to work with Hal Box who ended up being the dean at UT.
And he had an old house in Highland Park that he was remodeling and the guy that owned it was a big entrepreneur and he had five private dorms he wanted to do around the country.
And it was a small firm and he was seeing dollar signs of these private dorms.
So he went all out on redoing her house, remodeling and additions.
So there was a big old Highland Park house.
They added this back, you know, den area.
And you went up these huge stairs and a giant landing and then up another huge stairs.
Then you would have to circle back to get to the den.
And I said, well, why not?
On that landing, you put in some carved stair treads.
that were spiral that would take you right to the den and then you don't have to go all this way around.
And she had literally Louis XV furniture, rosewood and bronze.
She had needlepoint window shades.
I mean, the place was ornate.
So I designed an Art Nouveau pattern on the stair transit.
Well Hal Box went in for the bidding and as he was sitting down the contractors were snickering saying there are no woodcarvers in Texas.
And so they gave her this bid without the woodcarver and they said there aren't any woodcarvers, we wouldn't know where to go.
And she was furious, she said I fall in love with that, I'm not going to go on with the remodeling unless my stairs are carved.
And he said not to worry, we have a woodcarver in the office.
That's how he came up with the idea.
And so he came back the next day and sat down with his elbows on the table and looked at me and said, guess what?
You're going to carve some stares at night.
As you look back on those panels at the MSC, have there been any particular individuals and or special comments that you treasure in your
in your heart?
Any special person who said they've done anything?
Well, most of them, I guess I would like just the comments that they said they felt it belonged to them.
I mean, like, to me, that would be the ultimate artist compliment if you're communicating.
And it seems to communicate with all the different people.
Occasionally I'd meet people over in, or in another town even, and be chatting, and there would be an Aggie there and said, did you ever go to A&M and see that?
And they would go, oh my god, yeah, and then they would go on and on.
And then several foreign visitors, evidently, that have come to campus have made comments about them before.
Has anybody ever teased you about a Texas Tech graduate doing it?
Yeah, yeah.
Is that right?
Well, Ron Skaggs occasionally will tease me about that, and I said, you know, after being here 31 years, I said, when A&M plays Tech, I root for A&M.
In fact, my dad would get furious, because even in the 70s, when A&M would play Tech, I would phone him up if A&M beat and razz him about it.
because you and I share, being non-ANM undergraduates, when did and how did your roots get into Aggie soil?
When did you begin to feel a devotion to this institution?
Oh, probably, well, doing the research.
Okay.
On the panels.
You know, I felt it was an incredibly special place to be.
You know, I could hardly think of any other place, you know, that would have that kind of history, you know, in Texas.
And the administrators I met, other faculty members, with a few exceptions, you know,
were always welcoming, they were warm, they weren't cold, and other universities that I've been at, you know, there was a lot of back batting, people being lofty and snatty and things like that, and it just seemed to be a really special place to be, and a place that you could do things, experiment with things, come up with new things on your own without people saying you had to fit within a little confine.
Was the dean part of those?
Oh, yeah, Romnick was great.
Describe him as the leader of the college at that time.
Well, he would let you do anything, and he would support you.
And it didn't matter whether he agreed or not.
Like, to get my class to work together as a team, a lot of times the first week of class, I would have them build their classroom.
So they had to create an environment.
And one of them, they brought in chicken wire and made plaster, decoupage-type stuff, and created a free-form organic shape.
And he would come in going, oh, my god.
But he would back off.
He wouldn't say anything.
But it's completely against Romnick, because Romnick is less is more.
You know, everything is structured and pure, and I was the total opposite end.
He would have a coronary if he walked in my living room, because he would just go, oh God, because it was eclectic as all get out.
But he would never call me down and say, no, you have to do it like the Institute of Technology in Illinois.
And even, which is, probably don't want this on tape, but Mad Max Granner, who was in third year, he built spaces up there, and they sort of did it with stretch burlap and stuff like that.
So anyhow, they were having their grand opening on a Sunday night, and they invited Stace on that.
And so we walked in, and in this brown furlap, there was this fake black fur, and then pink, foamed, it was a vulva, and with a little horn at the top.
And he had stretched some plastic across it, and they put a condom they'd made out of cleaning bags and pushed Stacell through it.
And that was their space.
But, you know, Romnick,
that was the only thing that Romnick had them modify because he was out driving on campus and got to about where the engineering building was and looked up and could see an eight foot vagina in the architecture building and thought that's gone beyond so he did have them take that down but that's the only thing that he's ever without your without him telling you or without your asking
What did you sense, though, were in fact his basic guidelines?
His basic guidelines were excellence.
You know, as long as whatever they did in the class, the students excelled and learned about themselves and about the field.
That was all he really cared about.
And whatever means you used to get there was okay by him.
To whom did you turn for other opinions, advice, information, or whatever?
Probably John Ferry, Jerry Maffey, Cecil Stewart when he was here, some of the landscape faculty.
You know, Mike Murphy's been here quite a while.
Now did the, were there faculty meetings on a regular basis?
Yeah, but not too many, you know, maybe once or twice a semester.
Okay.
And the program, when you first got here, had about how many students, I reckon?
350.
Uh-huh.
And now it's about 1850.
And it's gotten up to be, I think, 2100 at one point.
Help trace from the late 60s, go up into the, what were some of the important steps in the growth and progress?
Okay, Romnick was probably the most positive direction because he took the College of Architecture before it was a college, when it was still a department under engineering, and then in 62 made it into a College of Architecture.
Not really, it wasn't either.
School of Architecture.
And then in 69 he changed it to a College of Architecture, creating all the different departments.
And by then it was the 4 plus 2.
Right, it was the 4 plus 2.
And then he started the Doctor of Environmental Design, which changed to the PhD.
And construction science changed from building construction to construction science.
And then he was asked to leave, I guess, by the Board of Regents because of the McGraw thing in Carpus.
Joe McGraw evidently had done something that offended one of the Board of Regents and he was conducting a class in Carpus off campus or something and it wasn't allowed so they told Romnick to fire him and Romnick refused to fire him and so he said you'll have to either fire him or you'll have to step down as dean so he stepped down as dean and then that's how we ended up getting stuck with Raymond Reed for a few years
Okay.
Yours truly was dean of faculties at that time.
I mean, I might not be getting the right story.
No, no, on the read.
Because as far as I know, you're correct on the other part.
And I get there just about that time.
As far as you recall, how was the search conducted?
For Raymond Reed?
Yeah.
When they brought everyone in, Raymond Riegel was like number four or five on the list, and as we understood it, the administration didn't want to pay for any one of the other four, and Raymond didn't ask for a price tag, so they hired him the cheapest.
Right.
This is a note to the typist.
This would be an editorial note.
There was included in the group a man who was then at the University of Arizona that was way up near the top, if not the top.
And yours truly and Richard E. Winerdi, W-A-I-N-E-R-D-I, we were very impressed with him.
as was John C. Calhoun, the Vice President for Academic Affairs.
And one afternoon we asked Dr. Calhoun, do you want him?
Yes, he's the best, isn't he?
Yes, we think he is.
Then get on the phone, see if you can get him.
What about the salary?
Pay whatever it takes, because we want high quality.
We got on the phone, and we did, and we reported back to him the next day what had happened.
Good, what was the salary?
We told him.
He said, oh, that's much too high.
But you told us pay whatever.
Well, no, that's too much.
So we called him back and he then withdrew.
And by then, as far as I recall, Reed was about the only one left, period, quote.
Okay, end of note.
On this machine, what do you think was the general reaction of the faculty?
You don't have to... With Raymond Reed?
Yeah.
They were pretty depressed.
They felt like they were sort of the weak sister, that they were just having somebody pushed off on them because they really didn't count for much.
Now, how is Bill's leadership style different from Romanek's?
Raymond was... I won't get sued for all this long.
A sweeping judgment.
He went up to Stasel, John Ferry, Bob Schiffre, Karen Hager, anybody that had an art background would say, you don't belong in our faculty.
You have no business teaching any of our students anything.
And he said, I'll work my hardest to get rid of all of you.
And, you know, they were the key to the beginning of design.
And so he put, so Stasel was department head at the time.
So to placate Raymond Reed, because Raymond couldn't get rid of them because they were all tenured, he put me in teaching freshman design because I was an architect.
knowing full well that nothing would really change.
And so Raymond, who never really saw what anyone was doing, because he never checked, you know, and he couldn't get rid of them, you know, said, okay, if Rodney's teaching freshman design, that's okay then.
But... He was dean about how long?
maybe five years or six.
Who follows?
Charles Hicks.
Describe him and his style.
Charles Hicks was an engineer.
Came from where?
He was teaching over in Civil.
And I guess he went with the Construction Science faculty.
And he was in two years, I think.
And he was like
No leadership at all.
I mean, as if he didn't exist.
I mean, it was like if it wasn't for the faculty who was moving forward, you know, I mean, he just really didn't exist.
But between he and Raymond created enough scandals.
During those years, who were the faculty members providing the leadership within the College of Architecture that deserve a pat on the back?
Stacell, Dan McGilvery, I guess himself.
John Ferry, James Marsh, Bob White.
And the land development program, is that what it's called?
Yeah, Wolfgang Russell.
Yeah, began during that period.
And Wolfgang was really good.
Wolfgang was strong.
He didn't care who was dean or who he had to step on.